+++
date = '2022-04-09T16:56:07-05:00'
draft = false
title = 'Evaporative Test Load for DAQ Testing'
+++
Every now and then, I come up with a hack for a problem that's better than a
purpose built solution. I love when this happens. I wanted to share a quick
story about one such hack that I came up with recently.

## Background

I'm currently designing firmware for a wearable ring packed full of sensors --
think Oura ring, but with medical grade data acquisition. The device is very
small with an equally small battery, so we have to be judicious with every
Joule of energy spent taking or transmitting measurements from the sensors
onboard.

One of the sensors is an impedance sensor for measuring skin conductance. Skin
impedance has a surprisingly high dynamic range, and accordingly this sensor
has a lot of options for adjusting the gain & sensitivity. Given the power
constraints of this product, it's crucial that the sensor is able to wake &
acquire the signal quickly, record only as much data as necessary, then return
to sleep just as quickly. Wake and sleep are taken care of for us by the
sensor... the trick is in how quickly we can acquire the signal and begin
measuring.

## Design validation proved to be a challenge

Given the importance of quick and efficient data acquisition, I needed a good
way to validate the actual behavior when the firmware was deployed.
Essentially, I needed a way to generate a controlled impedance and measure the
controller's performance when acquiring the necessary data. Measuring
performance was easy... we had lots of diagnostics available. The challenge was
actually in designing a controlled impedance that could mate to the fully
packaged ring.

At first I tried the manual approach: a fixture with potentiometers and
switched Rs/Cs to create different impedances. This was useful for some static
testing, but proved not very useful for dynamic testing. For example, I was
able to generate sweeping resistances by turning the potentiometers, but my
hand was never steady enough to avoid triggering the derivative compensation in
the PID controller running in firmware. **I needed a way to _smoothly_ sweep
impedance across the full acquisition range of the device.**

## A quick hack that became standard procedure

At this point I was tempted to begin designing a programmable load, when I had
an idea. A wet cloth would give a nice impedance sweep as the liquid
evaporates. At first the cloth would have very low impedance, but the impedance
would steadily (and _smoothly_) increase as the cloth dried out.

So I decided to give it a try. One Kimwipe, a few strips of Kapton tape, and
about 5 minutes of my time were all it took:
{{< img src="evap-ring.jpg" alt="Evaporative load" caption="I rolled a Kimwipe and affixed it to the ring with Kapton tape. I could repeatedly soak the wipe and measure impedance as the wipe dried out. Isopropyl alcohol was helpful for quicker evaporation times." >}}

The results were perfect! Although the sweep was not linear (more like an
exponential decay), it was smooth, repeatable, and very useful for monitoring
DAQ performance. I was able to re-soak the cloth to re-run tests, and the
results were very repeatable; exactly what I needed from my validation setup.

Here is an example impedance sweep I was able to capture (measured as
conductance instead of impedance):
{{< img src="conductance-sweep.png" alt="Conductance sweep" caption="Conductance sweep measured by the DAQ." >}}

## Conclusion

It felt a little silly soaking and drying a cloth to test an electronic device,
but you can't argue with results. In the end, I'm glad I didn't go through the
trouble designing a programmable load, when all I needed was a few scrap
materials and some water ðŸ˜‚
